# Transparent, PAC-aware Checkpoint-Restart for macOS

This document intends to preview the internals of transparent checkpointing for macOS on Apple Silicon. In its current implementation, processes executing both arm64 and arm64e binaries are transparently checkpointed and restarted in a new process. The most noteworthy ideas of this implementation are transitioning Linux techniques to MacOS, and mitigating pointer authentication failures during a restart.

## Transition from Linux to macOS
### Virtual Memory
Without the /proc filesystem on macOS, enumerating memory segments while performing a checkpoint must use an alternative to reading /proc/self/maps. In order to obtain the virtual address, size, protection and shared bits, and other information regarding during a checkpoint, Mach VM APIs are used. Using the interface **mach_vm_region_recurse()**, it is possible to iterate through each mapped region in the address space, with each call to mach_vm_region_recurse populating the Mach VM struct,
**struct vm_region_submap_info_64**. Among providing the address, size, protection, and sharing mode of each region, this Mach struct contains a **user_tag** field, which is helpful in determining which memory segments to serialize or skip during a checkpoint. On Linux, /proc/self/maps includes the backing file of shared objects as well as labels for particular segments (stack, heap, vdso etc.), helping in identifying segments in the address space. On macOS, the a Mach virtual
memory region's user_tag serves a similar purpose by identifying stack and heap regions, dynamic library segments, and guard pages, among others. Such information is used to heuristically determine the disposition to take when checkpointing a process's address space. Overall, Mach VM provides low-level interaction with the virtual memory subsystem and the relevant APIs expose the underlying details of an address space needed for a checkpoint library, compensating for the loss of procfs
virtual memory information when going from Linux to macOS.
#### dyld Shared Cache
The dyld shared cache in as on-disk file of several commonly used dynamic libraries and it is intended to be an optimization for application startup time by avoiding the need to load shared objects individually. When a process is created, the shared cache file is memory mapped into the address space. At any point in time, every process in the system will share the same "build" of the shared cache and have the shared cache memory mapped at the same base address. Several memory
segments, such as text and constant data, can be shared directly by different processes whose reads will be served by the same backing store, while other segments containing mutable data are marked copy on write. Hence, COW regions that are written to must be saved and serialized during a checkpoint. The approach taken to checkpointing shared cache regions and the limitations imposed by the nature of the shared cache are discussed below.

Deciding if a shared cache region should be saved during a checkpoint is straightfoward. If a region within the shared cache is private or COW, and contains dirty pages, it must be saved such that it can be restored in the address space of the restart process. Mach VM's struct vm_region_submap_info_64 exposes this information by the presence of the **share_mode** and **pages_dirtied** fields. However, there is one particular restriction that the shared cache imposes on
checkpoints. As mentioned earlier, each process views the shared cache at the same virtual base address where *base = 0x180000000 + random slide*. This random slide is per-boot and not per-process, so in the common case, the serialized contents of shared cache region can be restored directly into the restart process's address space at the same address if a checkpoint and subsequent resart occur across one boot of the system. If a checkpoint is restarted from after a system
reboot, the address to restore shared cache regions can be calculated by computing the difference between the previous and current shared cache slide. 

However, the limitation of restoring the checkpointed shared cache regions is encountered when the shared cache is fully rebuilt. If the format of the shared cache has been restructured, a naive restore would overwrite a different library's data where another shared object's data segment used to exist in the shared cache. To account for this, one could attempt to identify the specific shared object and segment that they would like to restore, and find the exact address where it
lives in the freshly built shared cache. This is made difficult by the fact that the shared cache is, in essence, a memory mapped file. This means that querying one region of the shared cache through the Mach VM subsytem returns information about one region as a multiple of the page size (16KB for Apple Silicon Mac), while this region may actually contain several system library segments which can be as small as an order of bytes. Thus, it is infeasible to take a fine-grained
approach towards checkpointing and restoring shared cache segments, and the obscure nature of the shared cache make a rebuild difficult to account for.

## Pointer Authentication and the arm64e ABI
### PAC Basics
Pointer authentication is a hardware security feature supported by the newest Apple Silicon devices, and is enabled by pointer authentication key registers (APIAKey_EL1, APDAKey_EL1, APIBKey_EL1, etc) and the arm64e ABI. To understand the purpose of each key, note that 'A' keys are process independent, 'B' key are process dependent, 'I' keys are for instruction addresses, 'D' keys are for data addresses, and 'EL1' implies that only the kernel can read or write these registers.
'PAC' instructions generate a pointer authentication code for a given register and an 'AUT' instruction removes the PAC in order to dereference, branch, or return to an address. PAC instructions also use a 64 bit modifier in addition to the PAC key register when generating a signed pointer. For example, **pacda x9, x10** will generate a PAC signature for **x9** using **x10** as a modifer, and **pacibsp** will sign the link register (implicit) with the current stack
pointer value and the 'IB' key.

On macOS, all system libraries and binaries are compiled for the arm64e ABI, emitting 'PAC' and 'AUT' instructions for security. arm64e compiled binaries executing on Apple Silicon devices will emit their own PAC instructions, and will also load macOS system libraries which use PAC instructions. On the other hand, user-compiled arm64 binaries will not use pointer authentication instructions, but may load arm64e system libraries which do. When an arm64 process executes
instructions from an arm64e compiled system library, most 'PAC' instructions will be NOPs. However, PAC instructions using APIBKey_EL1 (pacib, pacibsp, autib etc.) will still execute in an arm64 process. What this means is that checkpointing both arm64 or arm64e binaries must consider the implications of pointer authentication. This is made more concrete in the following section.

### Checkpoint-Restart with PAC
The implications that PAC have for checkpointing on macOS are as follows. Any pointer which was signed with the IB (APIBKey_EL1) or DB (APDBKey_EL1) keys in the checkpointed process, will cause a pointer authentcation failure if not re-signed in the restart process. The 'B' keys are process dependent, meaning that a these keys are generated uniquely per-process. Thus, if a register context from process A is restored in process B through a call to setcontext(), upon the first use
of PAC'd pointer previously signed with a 'B' key, process B's 'AUT' instruction will generate an invalid pointer and failure will occur if the pointer is dereferenced (SIGSEGV, SIGBUS, etc.). Furthemore, although they are process independent, pointers signed with the 'A' keys must also be considered because they are randomized per-boot. Thus, to restart from a checkpoint that occured before a system reboot, pointers signed with 'A' keys must be re-signed as well.

For additional context, note that the prctl() allows one to read and write to PAC key system registers from userspace on Linux. No such facility is provided for userspace on macOS. The approach used to mitigate PAC failures for checkpoint-restart is done without being able to read or write to system registers. The implementation is is discussed further below.

### Restoring Register Context
The first consideration for managing PAC is directly related to **getcontext()** and **setcontext()**. Restoring the user thread's context from when it was checkpointed is essential to providing checkpoint-restart facilities, and it is also the most close-range encounter with PAC during checkpoint and restart. A call to getcontext() on macOS saves the calle-saved general-purpose and NEON registers (x19-x28, v8-v15), frame pointer, link register and stack pointer. The link
register (x30) obtained from a call to getcontext() will almost certainly be PAC-signed pointer, as every function call in arm64e binary or call into a system library from an arm64 process will emit a $pacib\ x30, sp$ or $pacibsp$ instruction before pushing a frame onto the stack. Additionally, the stack pointer and frame pointer will be PAC'd by the implementation of getcontext() itself with the pacda instruction. 

The checkpoint-restart implementation regarding register contexts as PAC is as follows. Before saving and serializing the register context, check if each register is signed (PAC'd), if so, record the modifier which was used to sign it, and mark a bit that indicates it was signed. This information is included in a struct, **ckpt_context_t**, that stores a ucontext_t, an array of modifiers, and a bitmap to indicate which registers were signed; This allows the signatures to be recreated at
restart using the PAC keys which will be different in the restart process. Before the restart process calls **setcontext()** to restore the checkpoint's context, the PAC signatures are recreated by doing the following. Check the ckpt_context_t bitmap to see what registers were previously signed, and thus should be re-signed before calling setcontext(). Then emit the relevant PAC instruction with the recorded modifer to recreate the signed pointer with the
new process's keys. The register context, including PAC signatures, is now fully replicated, and setcontext() is called to resume the thread's execution. 

The relevant functions that implement these procedures are **pac_strip_context()** and **pac_sign_context()** of which the former strips signatures and records PAC information and the latter recreates signatures using the recorded inforamation. **pac_strip_context()** is called within a signal handler which is responsible for performing the checkpoint, and **pac_sign_context()** occurs in the function **restart()** which restarts from a checkpoint image.

#### PAC'd Link Register on the Stack
